N1C CSG unmanaged certificates (#1597)
nginx/documentation: content/nginx-one-console/nginx-configs/certificates/csg-unmanaged-certificates.md

---
nd-content-type: concept
nd-docs: DOCS-000
nd-product: NONECO
title: Unmanaged certificates in Config Sync Groups
toc: true
weight: 200
---

## Overview

Unmanaged certificates are SSL/TLS certificates that you install and manage manually on NGINX instances. Unlike managed certificates that are uploaded and distributed through the NGINX One Console, unmanaged certificates are installed directly on individual instances and referenced by their file paths in NGINX configuration files. You are responsible for distributing, updating, and maintaining these certificates across your infrastructure.

> ### Unmanaged certificates in Config Sync Groups

Reviewer: Markdown format rule (ref 022)

```suggestion
### Unmanaged certificates in Config Sync Groups

```

## How unmanaged certificates work in Config Sync Groups

### Certificate tracking and visibility

When you use unmanaged certificates in a Config Sync Group:

- The NGINX Agent collects certificate metadata from each instance
- The Console displays unmanaged certificates based on their file paths and metadata
- Certificate consistency is determined by comparing certificate contents and file paths across instances

### Consistent certificates

When all instances in a CSG reference identical certificate files with the same file paths:

- Their contents and metadata match across all instances
- The CSG displays a single unmanaged certificate entry for that file path

### Inconsistent certificates

If certificate contents differ between instances, even when file paths are the same:

- Each unique certificate appears as a separate unmanaged entry in the Console
- Certificates are identified by their content and associated instance
- The CSG displays separate certificate entries in the configuration

If certificate file paths differ between instances:

> - CSG publication may fail

Reviewer: Just checking. Is it CSG or certificate publication that can fail?

Reviewer: If it is CSG publication that can fail, I'd change current line 44 (comment added there)

- The CSG configuration will be out of sync
- Instances may not receive proper configuration updates

## Requirements for unmanaged certificates

To use unmanaged certificates effectively in Config Sync Groups, you must:

- **Manual installation**: Install certificates manually on each NGINX instance in the CSG
- **Identical file paths**: Ensure that file paths referencing unmanaged certificates are identical across all instances
- **Content consistency**: Maintain identical certificate file contents across all instances to ensure proper tracking
- **User responsibility**: Take full responsibility for certificate distribution, updates, and consistency

## Important considerations

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

NGINX One Console still helps you track unmanaged certificates:

```

### Certificate tracking

- The NGINX One Console tracks unmanaged certificates by their content and file paths
- When certificates are consistent across all instances, their contents and metadata match, and a single consolidated entry appears in the CSG
- If certificate content differs between instances, multiple unique unmanaged certificates are displayed as separate entries

### Synchronization limitations

- **No automated sync**: Unmanaged certificates are not synchronized by the Console

> - **Manual updates**: You must manually update certificates on each instance when they expire or need rotation

Reviewer: For consistency: 

```suggestion
- **Manual updates**: Certificates must be manually updated on each instance
```

- **No validation**: The Console does not perform validation or rotation logic for unmanaged certificates

### Configuration options

If you don't want metadata tracking for unmanaged certificates, you can configure the NGINX Agent to ignore certificate directories using the `allowed_directories` setting.

## Best practices

### Converting to managed certificates

To maintain consistent visibility and automated management across CSGs, consider converting unmanaged certificates to managed certificates by:

1. Uploading them through the NGINX One Console
2. Leveraging the managed certificate solution for automated synchronization
3. Taking advantage of centralized certificate management features

## Troubleshooting

### Certificate inconsistencies

> If you see multiple entries for what should be the same certificate:

Reviewer: I see you've numbered these options. In general, I number steps when users have to do them, in order. 

If ordering is not required, I'd replace the numbers with bullets
